---
layout: posts
title: "Embulk v0.10 series, which is a milestone to v1.0"
date: 2020-03-13 12:39:56 +0900
last_modified_at: 2020-03-13 16:28:34 +0900
author: "dmikurube"
---

Five years have passed since we released the initial version of Embulk. It may be a good time to release `v1`, but we still have had some concerns to step up to `v1`. It turned out that we have to give up some plugin compatibilities to resolve those concerns. For these one or two years, we have somehow managed with minimum updates, but the limit is approaching.

This year, we steel ourselves to resolve those concerns with incompatible updates, and aim to release `v1` eventually. Let us explain the milestones to `v1`, and expected responses against the incompatibility.

---

The latest version is now `v0.9.23`, and we will have the `v0.10` series soon. `v0.10.*` is a **"development"** series, not for your production use. We will have several incompatibility, tries-and-errors, and experiments through `v0.10.*`. Many plugins would not work with some points of `v0.10.*` unless they don't catch up.

In your production, keep using `v0.9.*`. The `selfupdate` command won't update to `v0.10.*`. The latest versions of plugins should work with the latest `v0.9.*` of Embulk. We basically don't expect more updates in `v0.9.*`, but we may have a few backports only when plugins cannot catch up with `v0.10.*` without dropping availability with `v0.9.*`.

The Embulk core team will take care of plugins under [https://github.com/embulk](https://github.com/embulk), and some more popular plugins. For other plugins, we hope plugin authors will catch up. If they don't catch up on a plugin, the plugin will not work with `v0.10.*` and `v1`.

We will step up to the `v0.11` series as the next **"stable"** series once `v0.10.*` settles down. It intends to be production-ready. After we observe and confirm `v0.11.*` is finally working fine, we would transition to `v1`.

Stay tuned!

---

For plugin developers, we have a Slack workspace to discuss and Q&A on `v0.10.*` issues. Please leave a comment in [this Issue](https://github.com/embulk/embulk/issues/1222) if you want to join. (Note: The Slack workspace is for plugin **developers** not for **users**. We don't provide user support there.)

As the first step, please consider start building your Embulk plugin with this [Gradle plugin for Embulk plugins](https://github.com/embulk/gradle-embulk-plugins).
